Hey, Will.
>> Hi, Michael.
>> Thanks for being here on the live stream.
It's great to have you here.
>> Thank you.
Good to be here.
>> Thanks, everyone, for being on the live stream, on the live chat.
I see a bunch of familiar and friendly faces.
And if you've got some comments for Will or me, please put them into the chat,
and I'll try to make it part of the show.
If you're watching afterwards, maybe not so much.
But thank you for watching.
All right.
Will, you ready to kick this off?
>> Sure.
Let's do it.
Will, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thank you.
It's fantastic to finally have you on the show.
I feel like we've talked a lot about the work that you've been doing many times.
Not so much on Talk Python because we're more focused on a single topic.
But even so, I believe, you know, at the end I always ask for some project that needs attention,
needs some sort of shout out, and, you know, I believe Rich has come up more than once.
I think Textual has come up at least once there.
So the prior guests of the show have been fans.
And I know the audience is a big fan.
So yeah, congrats on all the progress there.
>> Great, thanks.
Yeah, I really appreciate the coverage.
You probably increased my star count by a few thousand.
>> Well, I do want to talk about that, because this project is super popular.
And as we get into it, I think it's going to be fun to explore some of the things
that you felt were key to that.
and if this is the first time people are hearing about Rich,
you definitely want to check out some of the screenshots.
Maybe I'll do something fun, like make part of the show,
have the show notes or the podcast player
have some screenshots from the various sections,
like as I said, I'll see if I can make that happen.
But before we get to all that,
before we dive into Rich and Textual
and all the other things, let's talk about you.
How'd you get into programming
and how'd you find yourself doing
all this open source Python?
How did I get into programming? Oh, okay. So, as a kid in the 80s, I guess, I had a
Spectrum 48k computer. It was a little plastic thing you plugged into your TV and you could
create very simple animations and little games. And I think from there I was hooked. That's
just something about me that connected with programming, I guess.
What's interesting is those games were so basic, right?
They weren't like 3D, VR, oh my gosh, I'm there,
or some of the flashy, even the flashy mobile apps,
mobile games these days.
But something about those early, early games
really captured the imagination, didn't they?
- Yeah, yeah.
And the fact that they were so limiting
had to make you a little bit creative,
so it encouraged creativity
because you couldn't do much of anything,
you had to make the best of what you got. So it encouraged you to experiment. I think
it was a great way to get people into programming again. I think until recently we haven't had
that and I think the Raspberry Pi does that to some extent, which is a great thing.
Yeah, it sort of reaches out to the real world in a more simplistic way, kind of repeating
that cycle, right?
Yeah, yeah, and it just allows people access to programming in a very kind of accessible
form for children, I guess.
I think the next generation in 20 years will be citing Raspberry Pi is how they got into
programming.
Interesting.
Yeah, I built a robot the first time around or something like that, right?
Yeah.
Instead of wanting to play a game or script a game out or something like that.
Interesting.
And a lot of times I ask people, "Okay, well, what are you doing now?"
They're like, "Oh, I'm head of data science at companies such and such."
You've taken a very interesting, and I suspect a lot of people will be quite jealous of what
you're up to these days, right?
What are you doing now?
Yeah.
So up until recently, I was contracting.
But I ended my contract.
I'm going to take a year out.
Well, possibly a year, depends how much,
depends how things go.
But the idea is to work on open source,
specifically rich and textual.
And other projects that take my fancy as well,
anything that I can contribute to,
I'll try my hand at it.
It's not entirely selfless,
because I do think there might be commercial applications
for textual down the line,
but certainly for this first six months,
it'll be just focusing on just making it the best.
- Making it super, super solid foundation.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Well, I don't think it's gonna take that much
to get some things in place to make this long-term for you.
People can go, if they're a company or individually,
they're finding huge value,
they could go to GitHub and sponsor you.
There's enterprise stuff that can be set up.
We'll dive a little bit into that more,
possibly later as well, but I wish you a lot of luck.
But I think with the traction that you're getting
and the new things, I really find GitHub's sponsor feature
to be something of a game changer, right?
I mean, I remember looking back, you'd see,
oh, here's a popular project.
Maybe it's not even an open source library,
but it's like an app.
And it's like, click here to thank the developer on PayPal.
And just--
- It was a little bit of a barrier to entry.
- Yeah, and maybe you do it once, right?
But with GitHub, you can say,
I just kind of want to say, I want this to keep going.
So here's $2 a month.
And if not that many people who find it valuable
send in a couple of bucks a month,
all of a sudden it starts to be a foundation
that you can really build from.
- Yeah, it could build up and be something
which is sustainable and sustain open source
because so many people benefit from open source,
including big companies, big corporations.
But a lot of these developers are doing it
in their spare time for the love of it.
And they haven't asked for funding before,
but a lot of them deserve funding.
So I've had lots of projects which could really use funding
to make sure they keep going,
to make sure that the software that we all use
is still available in a year,
two years and five years down the line.
- Yeah, otherwise we're gonna end up in a place
with like open SSL,
where there's one person who maintains it
and a quarter of the world
seems to be built directly upon it, right?
Remember that bug?
It was a huge problem.
- Heartbleed was it called?
Which is it?
Heartbleed?
- Yeah, Heartbleed, that's right.
- Yeah, which is a great name for a bug.
- It's like, well, why wasn't this fixed?
Well, there's one person who does it in their spare time,
but everything depends on it.
Yeah, but there's still one person
who does it in their spare time.
- Yeah.
- And yeah, it's really hard to put that kind of energy
and responsiveness into it.
All right, fantastic.
So let's talk, let's start with,
not Textual, which I had on the screen,
but let's start with Rich.
Rich is where things got started amongst Rich and Textual,
right, if I remember the history.
- Yeah, Rich was first,
that's about two years ago that I started dying out.
- Yeah, cool.
So tell people, you know,
a lot of people have heard of Rich.
But maybe tell folks out there, how would you describe it?
We've had ways to sort of print stuff nicer.
We've got pretty print in Python.
We've got Colorama where you can put color
into your terminal, but this takes it
to an absolutely new level.
So tell us about Rich.
- Yeah, that makes it difficult to describe sometimes
when people ask me what it does
'cause it does quite a lot of things.
But it's all under the umbrella of writing
more sophisticated output to the terminal.
So at the basic level, you can set colors
and you can set styles like bold and italic.
Next level up, it'll do word wrap
and it will also word wrap the styles
so you can apply bold and then word wrap it.
And then we have things like tables,
this quite sophisticated table support
which are quite close to HTML tables.
You can put things in cells.
- You've got a header row, you've got a little divider,
and then you've got the data.
- Yeah, and you can draw lines around it
and change the styles.
- You even have alternating rows, right?
So it kind of helps you line across,
but it's pretty neat.
- Exactly, yeah.
So it's quite sophisticated and it's all composable.
So if I've got a table, I can obviously put text inside it,
but I can put another table inside it
or I could put a progress bar inside it
or syntax highlighting inside it.
So the idea is that rather than like lots
of separate libraries which don't work well together,
which I think was the situation that we had previously,
now they all work together, they fit inside each other
and they integrate quite well.
- Right, so you could take your formatting
and put it in your Word wrap
and put it inside of a table cell or something like that?
- Exactly, yeah.
So one of the things that struck me,
well, there's a couple things,
but one of them is just how popular Rich is, right?
It's almost 30,000 GitHub stars.
That's close to FastAPI level of popularity
and not that far behind Flask and Django.
That's really, really popular.
When did you create this?
- Two years ago.
So I guess on the timeline, similar age to FastAPI,
but much younger than Flask and Django,
if I'm comparing them to those.
And over here it says on your page,
you have 2 million downloads a month.
That's pretty incredible.
- Yeah, that's pretty crazy.
I think quite a few of those are automated,
they're from CI systems.
But I do see that rising quite steadily.
- Yeah, I wonder how many of the CI systems
just in general out there, do caching at some level
where it wouldn't register, right?
You know, if I pip install a thing I've already installed
and it's a certain version,
I'll just say using cached version, right?
Versus if you create a brand new Docker image
and then the next thing you do is install your,
you know, pip install your dependencies
inside of your Docker container.
That's a true download, right?
'Cause that machine is totally fresh.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, what do you, did you have any feel
for what that breakdown is?
- To be honest, I'm not sure.
That site doesn't give you the breakdown.
To be honest, what I would be interested in
is how many developers typed pip install rich
in that month, you know, how many human beings
played with it, that would interest me more.
But suffice to say, quite a lot of people have used it.
- Quite a lot.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I'm sure it's changed the way that you think
about working on the library and whatnot, right?
You know, it's maybe this might destabilize,
this might cause a problem or this might cause confusion.
It's one thing to do that for a thousand people.
It's another to do that for 2 million.
- That's right.
- Or something like that, right?
You're gonna hear about it.
- Absolutely.
I didn't follow SemVer very strictly originally.
I always planned to use SemVer
and people started using it and I made a breaking change.
And I didn't think anyone was using this particular feature.
So I didn't increase the major version number.
And then a couple of days later,
I got an issue, someone telling me off, quite rightly so,
for not warning them about a breaking feature.
So since then, I've been very, very strict.
It's at version 10,
and that's because I've made 10 breaking changes to API.
They're actually quite small.
You know, it might just be one signature and one method,
but that requires a major version change.
- Right, but at that scale, obviously,
that's still gonna affect the people
you're gonna hear about it and whatnot, right?
- Exactly, I don't want to break anyone's code.
I don't want to give them a bad day.
So I'm very strict about that kind of thing, yeah.
- Yeah, fantastic.
And also people should pin their versions, right?
On the flip side, they can also make sure
that what they're working on is nice and stable, right?
- Yeah, a lot of people don't.
I do search GitHub sometimes for rich
and I look at their PyTumble, was it?
PyProject Tumble.
Yeah, and a lot of people don't pin their rich version.
It'll just be rich and it shouldn't break too much.
And often it's a hobby project,
So it's not the biggest deal.
- Right, it really depends.
Like it's one of the things I struggle with.
So I do a lot of course development, right?
And I don't necessarily want to pen people
to the oldest version.
I'd rather let them have the newest stuff.
So it exactly matches the documentation.
If they go check it these days and stuff,
if they go back, you know, six months and watch the video
or check out the demo app,
but at the same time, there's a chance of that instability.
There's always this tension, right?
I guess it depends on what the use case of that app or that library is.
Yeah, it's tricky to say.
The less critical it is for your business or your project,
the more you can relax.
If it's a tutorial, maybe it doesn't matter quite so much.
But if it's critical infrastructure, do you want to pin?
Yeah, so for my web apps, versions are pinned super strict.
even the dependencies of the dependency,
like the transitive closure of the dependencies
are all pinned, but on like little demo apps and stuff,
like it's just wide open.
So I think it depends.
All right, so out in the audience,
we have Hybotics says,
"Will, this looks really good to me.
I'm looking at repo now."
So not everyone has previously heard of Rich,
which is awesome.
- Oh, it's good to know there's a few people left.
- That's right, yeah.
I suspect there's actually a lot of people
who haven't heard it before.
Again, check out the screenshots
because if you think, oh, here's something
that sort of enhances terminal output,
that completely undersells the level
of what you've pulled off here.
And that's only before we even talk about textual, right?
Yeah, so let's talk about compatibility
because one of the things I find
with these sort of nicer terminal output things.
It's like, this works fantastic on POSIX systems.
Oh, but you better not be on Windows
or if you're a data scientist,
you like Jupyter Notebooks, you can forget about it.
But if you really want to run this thing,
so what's the story?
Like, where can I use this?
- Just about everywhere.
Linux, OSX, Windows, and Jupyter.
It was, to start out, it was Linux, OSX,
'cause that is the easiest platform
to develop this kind of stuff for.
Windows is a bit of a black sheep. It didn't quite work.
Windows is getting better though, right?
I mean, when it was CMD.exe, it was like,
oh, this is really different.
But the new Windows Terminal, I'm really digging it.
You know, the new PowerShell,
things like, oh, my Posh extensions.
I can feel much more at home on Windows
on the terminal than I used to.
Yeah, yeah.
So the new Windows Terminal is much better.
Rich doesn't have to do quite so many,
and doesn't have to jump so many hoops
to get Windows support.
In fact, it just runs kind of as is.
It still supports the older Windows terminal,
which does have a few issues.
It doesn't, it has very limited colors.
- Yeah, I guess maybe you want to, right?
If you're gonna give the app to somebody,
you can't really package up the terminal
they're gonna run it in.
So you probably wanna have your best possible experience on,
To be honest, most people are still going to be running cmd.exe,
even if they shouldn't.
Yeah, exactly.
I could just tell them to install Windows Terminal,
but that kind of goes against the ethos of this library.
I just want it to work so that people don't have to think about what it runs on.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, so Linux, macOS, and Windows
with good support for the new Windows Terminal,
very limited support for the old command prompt.
That's still pretty good.
- That's still pretty good.
- I think it's fantastic, actually.
I mean, if people are really passionate
about their terminal and they're on Windows,
they probably know about Windows Terminal anyway,
so they're probably good.
- That's true.
- The one that I thought was interesting
and nice is Jupyter Notebooks.
What's the support there?
- So it works quite well.
So I wasn't a big Jupyter user at the time.
I was obviously aware of it, but I didn't use it myself.
And people asked me for Jupyter support.
And I thought, it doesn't do that,
it just works in a terminal.
But then I looked into it, and it wasn't too bad
because I already had functionality
to export terminal content to HTML.
So I could put a little wrapper around that,
export it to HTML, and then insert it into Jupyter
that they've got an API,
which allows you to write content into a notebook.
And so I got Jupyter support up quite quickly, quite easily.
And it works quite nicely, which people appreciate.
It means that you can write code,
which writes to terminal mostly.
But if you do happen to run it in a Jupyter notebook,
then it'll write the same thing as well.
- It just knows, it detects that it's running
in the Jupyter environment, and then it just,
all right, output is not print, output is generate HTML.
- Exactly, yeah.
And Jupyter does have support for that.
It will capture standard output, and it will convert the colors
and everything.
But the problem is it wraps the lines.
So if you expanded the window, it
would break any kind of neat formatting.
If you've got a grid or a table, it would break that.
So I had to do the HTML export within Rich as well.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's super neat.
So basically, most anywhere people do Python
with a UI of some sort, this works as the takeaway.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, just going back to the pip pinning version stuff,
Wayland on the live stream says pip compile,
pip-tools is a game changer for pin dependencies
and pip compile specifically for managing pin dependencies.
That's what I've switched to as well.
So I just run a script checks for all the new versions,
regenerates all the pip compiled stuff.
And I'm really enjoying that.
I think that's fantastic.
- Okay, I've not used pip.
I want to check that out.
- Yeah, yeah.
So you basically define like a requirements file
that has what you actually have would have pip,
typed pip install,
and then it will generate a requirements.txt
that is the transitive closure of all of those dependencies
which are pinned.
And then you can ask anytime for it to update the versions,
the pinned versions of that.
- Okay, is that like Poetry's log files?
- I think it's similar, yeah.
I'm not 100% sure, but I think so.
All right, so let's talk about various features here.
I think just going through, I mean, we touched on them,
but let's dive into it a little bit,
maybe talk a little bit about the code you write.
So Kim Van Wyk is here to kick us off on the first one.
Try something as simple as drum rich import print
and your next project and you will be amazed.
Will, tell us why we'll be amazed.
Like what's this alternate print?
- Okay, so when I first wrote this as a console class,
you have to construct a class
and that's got a print method.
But I figured I could just overwrite the existing,
the built-in print because it's a function in Python 3,
I can just replace it with my own version.
So that's what I've done here.
There's a version of print you can import from Rich,
which has the same signature as a built-in print,
but it supports the console markup,
so you can insert these little square brackets
with a style like here we've got bold magenta,
and it'll do emojis.
You've got colon--
- And these styles,
like the square bracket bold magenta slash bold magenta,
this is specific to Rich.
This is something that you came up with?
- Yeah, that's right.
It's called, I call it console markup,
and the syntax is very BB code-like.
I don't know if you've ever used BB code.
Yeah, it's quite simple.
It's just like a markup where the tags have square brackets.
- Yeah, I like this a lot,
because one of the things that I'll use a lot still is,
which maybe I need to start switching
to what you're doing here, is Colorama.
But for Colorama, you'll do things like you'll import
the foreground settings or styles,
and then you can say foreground.green plus the text,
then foreground reset to go back to normal,
but you don't have the bold,
and then all of that stuff has to happen in code, right?
If I wanted to say import some text
and then show it on the screen,
that text could have these styles in it, right?
- That's right, yeah.
So you can embed it in code easier
or use it from file, et cetera.
And I think it's a bit easier to read
rather than doing lots of string concatenations.
And also the benefit over the Colorama approach,
Colorama is a very good bit of software.
I've relied on it for years.
But the problem is when you concatenate strings like that,
you insert these ANSI codes.
And then once you've built that string,
you can't do anything with it really.
You can't word wrap it, you can't format it.
So with console markup, you can do,
you can mark up bits of text with color and style, et cetera.
And then you can further do operations on them,
like word wrap and centering text
and putting it inside the table, et cetera.
- Right, two other things that jump out here
that are interesting is you have emoji support.
So you can say colon vampire colon,
which is pretty awesome.
You can, I mean, you can technically,
if the file format supports it,
You could actually put a vampire emoji in the string,
but it's still kind of nice that you have
this sort of emoji lookup, right?
- Yeah, exactly, because if you want to insert
the Unicode character, you'd have to go and find it
and then cut and paste it.
- Yeah, exactly. - But this way,
you can just do colon.
You can set that into console markup,
just colon vampire colon or colon smiley colon.
I think there's a couple of thousand emojis
you can use there now.
- Fantastic.
Then another thing that jumps out is you're printing,
"Hello, bold magenta world."
So that's the word world, bold and magenta,
and then the vampire.
But then you're also printing out a dictionary,
and the dictionary is like pretty printed,
but also syntax highlighted.
- That's right, yeah.
So if you print a container, like a dictionary list,
or like an atomic Python type,
it'll run the pretty printer over it.
So format it in kind of the style that people like.
In code, you probably format,
this is how black would format it.
So it looks much the same.
And then it runs syntax highlighting over it.
There's a few regular expressions.
So in rich, you can say anything between two quotes
is a string and therefore it's green.
Anything in angular brackets is a tag like thing.
So I'll bold the brackets and change the tag name
to bright red, or whatever it is.
And so that the output you get is quite readable
and looks like something that came out of VS Code
or your editor.
- Yeah.
The more I look at this, the more I think
maybe just every project, I'm gonna follow Kim's advice
and just from rich import print, because why not?
This looks, it has all this cool auto formatting.
- And does it look actually at the type
that it's printing to make any determination
or does it just look and see if it's source code
and then try to format it?
- It looks at the type.
- If it gets a dictionary or it gets an object
versus getting like a true string.
- It'll do both, it'll syntax highlight a string.
But if it's a container, if it knows that the type,
it'll do some syntax highlighting there.
And there's also a simple protocol you can add
to your own objects if you want them pretty printed
and formatted.
- Not dunder stir dunder repper, but something else.
- It's dunder rich repper.
You can specify the arguments and parameters
and the indentation and it'll render something
It's very much like a pretty printed dict.
- That sounds like something that would be fantastic
to add to some intermediate library that people use.
So I, sure, I could create a class and add it to mine,
but so often what I wanna do is print out
a Mongo engine model or a SQLAlchemy model
or a Pydantic model.
- Yeah.
- Pydantic could add that, or, you know what I mean?
Like these, like, or SQLAlchemy could add something
like, oh, this is how you, you know, describe,
like this one has an index and whatnot.
I think that'd be fantastic.
- Exactly, yeah, so I've added it to Atters,
so it'll pretty print objects from the Attrs library.
And I have a PR for Pydantic as well,
so in the future, you print a Pydantic object
and it'll format it quite similar
to the built-in data structures.
- Yeah, okay, fantastic, I love it.
So before we move on to this,
I do wanna talk about some other things,
'cause we're just scratching the surface here.
But one of the things that I think has both impressed me
And Brian and I over on Python Bytes,
on our podcast we do there,
we've been continuously impressed
at how fast you're adding new features
and still kind of keeping the ethos
of this library together.
Maybe give people a little hint on just the velocity here.
Like, how's that work?
- Well, I'm not convinced that it's been that fast.
Bear in mind, Rich is--
- It felt like a lot of work, it didn't feel that fast?
- It does.
But thing is, when I add new stuff to Rich,
I'm not starting from scratch.
There's several layers which are already built
and well tested.
So the bit that I add might not be as large
as maybe it looks.
- I see, so you've already got a lot of structure
and architecture that makes adding a new feature
not from scratch sort of thing, right?
So a good design, basically?
I hope so, yeah.
And it seems to be working quite well
because I did build a core feature set
and then I added some things to it.
And admittedly, those things came quite fast
because it wasn't that hard to implement.
And I've got a point there where Rich is quite large.
I'd be resistant to adding any more stuff to it
unless it is very useful for a broad selection of users.
- Sure.
Do you have a sense of how many lines of code it is?
I know you don't mean large in that sense,
you mean large in sort of feature set,
but do you have a sense of how many lines of code?
- You know what, I've never checked.
- Maybe we'll have to try more time with this recording.
Someone out in the audience will have like already
downloaded and checked for us, who knows?
All right, so the next thing let's talk about is the REPL.
So I can create a REPL or read eval print loop
by typing the word Python on the terminal.
And that opens it up, but it looks just--
it's probably the least possibly good experiences
you can have in Python.
There's no color.
There's no feedback on what's happening.
But then I could say from rich import pretty, pretty.install.
And then all of a sudden, basically,
the output of the REPL--
if I'd set a variable name, it'll print it out.
that becomes rich printed, right?
Tell us about this. - That's right, yeah.
So yeah, you call pretty.install,
and then everything you put into the,
after the prompt will be pretty printed.
So previously, if you printed a dict without rich,
it would just smush it onto a few lines.
It's quite hard to--
- Right, it's all one line except for the word wrapping,
which doesn't even break on words,
And there's zero color, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
So it's quite difficult to read.
I'm quite a visual person,
so I always had difficulty with this.
If it was more than two lines,
it'd be quite difficult for me to figure out
where the keys and the values are.
But if you do it with rich,
it'll pretty print it onto lines
and it'll indent it like you would code,
and then it'll highlight it.
So it makes things just much more readable.
A lot of people will put it in their startup file,
so they just get this ripple by default.
- Oh, interesting.
Yeah, that's a good idea.
Have you tried this on the more advanced
repls like PT Python or BT Python or those
where you get an eMaxie or Vim experience?
- I haven't, no, I've tried it on IPython
and it works quite nicely on IPython,
but I haven't tried it on other--
It probably works on PT Python, but I haven't tried it.
Cool.
All right, now another thing that you can do a lot with
is sort of taking it up to the next level is the console.
Tell us about this.
- Yeah, so the console class
gives you more kind of advanced features.
There's more options, more things to specify.
Typically you'd have a single console per project.
You could keep it in your top level object or as a global.
And it has a print method.
And there's also some other methods like,
there's a log method.
And there's a whole bunch of features you can do
when you construct the console.
Things like exporting the output to HTML.
- Okay, nice.
That's fantastic.
So one of the things you can do with the console, for example,
is you can set a style.
Say console.print and set some styles,
and then it'll come out in that style,
as opposed to embedding this console markup
into the text itself, right?
>>Yeah, yeah.
So you can decide--
sometimes you might not want the console markup,
especially if there's going to be
square brackets in the output.
You don't want them to be--
>>Or even if you're receiving a string,
and you just need to put it on the screen,
but you don't control,
you haven't generated the string
or it was generated by some other part of the app,
rather like here's a message,
I need to log this that I got.
You don't wanna like parse the string
to try to put text into it or more text, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
So you can disable the highlighting
and you can still set a style globally for that string
if you want it in red or cyan, whatever,
you can still get that,
but you can disable the console markup.
- Yeah, nice.
And then we have the inspect, rich inspect.
What is this one?
- So this is my favorite function in rich.
And it came quite late.
And what it does is you call it with any object
and it'll inspect the object
and it'll pull out doc strings
and it'll pull out methods
and then it will render it in quite a nice little table
that's quite easy to read.
And I find this terrific for exploring APIs.
Sometimes it's better than documentation.
If you get an object back from an API,
you don't quite know what methods it supports.
You just call--
- Right, so I could have typed something like dir,
my print dir my object,
and I get a list of dictionary objects
which are representing fields and methods and whatnot.
But they're all jammed together.
There's no like help.
This is fantastic.
So it's like a, almost a table version of that
with the one line of help next to it, right?
- Yeah, so it does the same kind of thing as dir or help.
- Way, way nicer, yeah.
- It makes it easier.
- There's also two things I see.
There's a block of stuff that has,
it's like a list of, I guess those are field names
and then it has the methods.
It's sort of called out separately as well.
So you're like, these are the fields or properties
and these are the fields
and then here's the probably methods and properties, right?
- That's right, yeah.
So it basically shows you the signature of all the methods
and the first line of the doc string.
There's an option to show you the full details,
but I find just that abbreviated information
is generally as much as I need.
- Oh, that's fantastic.
So it says things like copy equals def copy bracket bracket.
Would it say async def if it was an async method
or what's the, what is that?
What's the alternative of def there?
Is it just to show it's a method?
- That's just to show it's a method.
That's a good point about async.
I don't think it does do async def.
And that's a good idea.
- It'd be pretty dope to throw in a async def
or maybe a property if it's a getter method, right?
Or something like that.
- You're right, yeah.
I think it probably should do that.
It should inspect the method
and see whether it's async and then emphasize that.
Yeah, it's a good idea.
- Yeah, sure.
We'll open a PR on that podcast here, no problem.
All right, so those are ones that you've got
like graphics calling them out
as some of the really main things.
There's so much happening here that's amazing,
but like Waylon out in the live stream points out,
like mention rich tracebacks.
They're so good.
I have, I Python automatically start up with that.
And yeah, you've got a whole section down here
under the library of things like logging, log handlers,
progress bars, status, tree views, like crazy.
You have tree views in the terminal
that can expand and collapse with the mouse.
You know, there's more going on here
than just the stuff we've touched on, right?
There's a bunch of cool features.
- There's a lot going on, yeah.
Well, Rich will render the tree view.
It's textual, which provides the collapsing and--
- Ah, got it, got it, got it.
So we'll get to the interactive bits,
but yeah, so I can still draw a tree view
even with like little, your example here,
you've got emoji icons for say folders and files.
And then even in the file,
you've got an embedded syntax highlighted bit of code
that comes out of one of the files
and a markdown with some of the markdown rendered
as rich markdown.
- Yeah.
- Just as markdown, not rich the library,
but like just colorized and formatted.
- Yeah.
It goes back to the composability of rich objects.
I call them renderables.
But you can use them in various contexts.
So in here, you can set a renderable per node on the tree.
So you can do what we've done here,
add a table next to a tree item, or some syntax highlighting,
or render some markdown.
It doesn't really matter to rich what you ask it to render.
It can just do it in various contexts.
>> That's super cool.
Very cool.
OK, so we've got the tree, which is amazing.
Let's-- since Waylon mentioned it,
let's talk tracebacks real quick.
I mean, one of the things that really is tricky
with the tracebacks is a lot of times,
you've got to go to one end of them to see the error.
And then there's no color.
There's just a lot of stuff dropping in there.
Maybe sometimes it'll show the variable values,
but not really, you gotta kind of pull them out, right?
Things like that.
And what you get here is ridiculous.
First of all, what do I have to do
to make this happen with the beautiful tracebacks?
- You can do from rich import traceback, traceback.install.
And then- - And that's all good?
- Yeah, from then on, if you don't handle exception,
it'll be printed with rich.
Or you can- - This is the second thing
I gotta just put on all my apps.
- Yeah, it's a piece of cake to add.
So yeah, it's easy to do.
- Yeah, so tell me what people who are not seeing this
necessarily on the screen,
like what is this alternative traceback style
look like here?
- Okay, so it's actually falls much the same format
as a regular Python traceback.
It's just underneath the file,
you'll see some syntax highlighted code
showing you that the line where the exception happened
for each frame and underneath each block of code,
it'll show you the locals at that point in the frame.
So you can see the local variables.
- Right, these are called out in a nice table
with a nice formatting that we've already talked about.
So kind of as if you had done print,
from rich import print and then printed out the locals
into a table.
- Yeah, and it's all pretty printed.
So it's quite easy to read.
I find with regular Python tracebacks
is it takes quite a bit of skill to read them.
- Yeah.
- Particularly for beginners and even for intermediates,
you've got to sit down and analyze the trace packs,
but I'm hoping with this,
this just kind of presents the information
in a more readable way,
and you can like get more of the context of the error.
- Yeah, I think this is fantastic.
This definitely is super interesting.
I guess one more thing here to really dive into,
Maybe two, I think the log handler is really nice.
People should check that out, but maybe tables.
I know it doesn't sound as appealing and amazing
as necessarily as what we've been talking about,
but if I wanna have a nice formatted table in a text output,
I basically just don't do that.
I'm like, yeah, that's just,
that is way too much work to worry about this, right?
but with using Rich here,
you can have almost HTML level formatting styles,
borders on, border off, just header, content divider,
like alternating rows, like I said,
right align, left align.
There's all sorts of amazing stuff here.
Tell us about the tables.
- Yeah, so I didn't realize how hard tables would be
to implement when I started it, or I might not have.
(laughing)
- Might not have done it at all.
Tables are quite complicated because you've got to calculate
optimal column widths, and that gets really complicated
when you've got text which can wrap
and other renderables that can go in those cells.
But it does work quite nicely now,
and it can handle just about anything you can throw at it,
and it will scale the table nicely and elegantly
if it doesn't fit into the width of the terminal.
And it's also quite a good layout tool.
You can switch the borders off entirely
and then use it to lay out other things.
Much of the way we do it--
- One thing that comes to mind right away
is I think of some of the nice progress bar type things
for the terminal, like TQDM and stuff.
And they're great, but I'm always,
like the stuff on the right,
it'll have like what it's doing
and then it'll have a progress bar
and then it'll have maybe how fast is it operating
or how much time has it got to go or something.
And those are always doing a little pulsing
because the thing on the right is always changing
and they never quite line up.
You could do that here but have a table
and put the progress bar in one of the center fill bits.
Yeah, so you can do lots of things
regarding alignment to fit everything together.
And like you said, stop that effect
where bits of content will flicker
Flickr because they're using less characters
'cause it goes from 100 and then to 99.
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah. - Yeah.
So yeah, it's a very good layout tool
and also just a good way of presenting tabular information,
which is kind of what it was designed for.
- Yeah, it is a table, right?
All right, so last one, I've got some content
and probably a most common way that it's in
a lightweight format, but you want to turn it into something
full featured in terms of text is Markdown, right? So for
example, the Python bias website is almost like it's hard, like
the vast majority of the content there is Markdown, talk about
on training, like all the stuff we've got the CMS we built in
the back end, it's all Markdown. Rich has Markdown support too,
right?
And that's right. Yeah, there's a Markdown class. And basically,
I took common mark library, which parses the Markdown. Okay,
and I substituted the bits which were generating HTML
with something which generates rich output.
And it turns out there's a reasonable job
of things like headers and does the style just fine.
And there's also syntax highlighting.
It'll actually call out to the syntax highlighting code.
So if you've got a Python code block,
it'll actually highlight that Python code block.
- Yeah, you have support for inline code
with the backtick thing, backtick,
and then the blocks of code,
which are the triple back slash,
or triple back ticks, or the four spaces or whatever.
- Yeah, so it supports much of the basic common mark syntax
and does a reasonable job of rendering.
It won't look quite as good as a web browser,
but I find it quite readable.
- But it's in the terminal,
and I didn't have to do anything to get it there, right?
So that's pretty fantastic.
Yeah, really, really nice.
All right, so I think this is probably
as much of the details of which we want to dive into
in terms of like the feature set and stuff,
but there's still more to go.
There's a lot to love out of this library, which is great.
Maybe just give us a sense of the internals.
Like how did you make this happen?
How do you make it work?
Is this curses to the nth degree or what's happening?
- No, so there's no curses.
There's a layer, which what makes most of it work,
where I render everything into,
and that's a list of what I call segments.
The segment consists of a bit of text plus a style.
And the thing about having that intermediate layer
before you actually render to the terminal
is you can manipulate it afterwards.
So I can apply color and style and then do word wrapping,
and then I can render it onto the terminal.
So everything is built on that and a protocol.
So objects can add a couple of methods.
They can add a Dunder rich or a Dunder rich console method.
And that then they can themselves be renderable.
So you can print your own custom objects
and that will use that intermediate layer segments
to render everything onto the terminal.
- Nice, okay.
Yeah, it sounds like a really good separation
you could probably also, if you need to do something specific
for one platform versus another, that layer,
you could make a decision on how to do that without...
- That's exactly it, yeah. - ...having to put it all over the place, right?
Yeah, so I render onto the segments, and that's platform-independent.
But there's another bit of code which will convert those segments
onto the appropriate format of the platform.
And the platform might be the number of colors
that's supported by terminals, because some will support
some will support 16.7 million colors,
some will support 256, and then some will support 16.
But because of that intermediate layer,
I can make sure that no matter what you write,
we'll work on the terminal on the given platform.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Okay, let's see.
So one of the things I do wanna circle back to
is this idea of you're taking a year off
to continue to work on this project,
to grow it even further than it already has
and also do other things in this general realm.
And so there's a couple of ways
in which people can support you, right?
If you're a large bank that depends on this kind of stuff,
one of the good options is Tidelift, right?
People can get a Tidelift subscription for rich
and that gives, what do they get with that?
- So I don't think you get a subscription for rich per se,
but you can get a Tidelift subscription.
- I see, okay.
- And that means that that money is divided
amongst all the open source projects that you use
that are signed up to Tidelift.
And in return, you get more responsive developers
and developers which will handle like security issues,
et cetera.
It just takes the risk of open source code
for big organizations because there is a little bit of risk
in the, if you're relying on someone's hobby project,
are they going to be around in six months to a year time?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- So Tidelift ensures that developers will be around
in the future to support your code going forward.
- Absolutely.
The other one is right up the top here.
I could click sponsor and then I can come over here.
Also that pulls up a link to the external funding
for Tidelift, but I could hit sponsor.
Do you have plans or anything like that?
I know some projects have, there's a gold sponsor,
and here's just a keep it going sponsor.
Do you have anything like that,
or is it just what people want?
- There is, yeah.
So GitHub Sponsors supports tiers,
so depending on how much you want to sponsor,
I will help you with your projects.
I'm always happy to help people actually open source projects.
I'm always happy to do that.
But for the larger tiers, I will do code reviews
or I will help you with your project on a more formal basis.
I might even write code for you.
So it's up to you what you want to sponsor.
If you just want to say thanks, that's very much appreciated.
If I fixed a bug for you and you just want to say thanks,
that's fantastic.
But if you're a company which is benefiting
from the work that I do
or the work that other open source developers do,
you can sponsor a bit more to ensure
that it keeps the work going.
- Right on, yeah.
And I encourage people,
if they're depending heavily upon this,
help you keep going strong,
especially as you're transitioning to just working on this.
Yeah, also, someone's forked it
since we even pulled it up here, how cool.
So the other, the next step that maybe you would take this,
you talked about not wanting to add
too many insane features to rich,
growing that, right?
Keep it focused on target,
is you also have this project called Textual.
And Textual is a TUI, we've all heard of a GUI,
but a TUI is a text user interface
instead of a graphical user interface, right?
- Yeah, I think it's a bit of a misnomer.
I mean, 'cause the interface is constructed with text,
granted, but it's still a graphical thing you're looking at.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so I think of it as a GUI,
but with kind of like a fairly retro aesthetic.
- Yeah, it does have a bit of a retro aesthetic.
I would say maybe if you built something
with like Colorama or something,
that would be maybe more 2e-esque, right?
Where there's, where you look at what you build
with actual, it's got scroll bars, it's got banners,
it's got icons.
(laughs)
>> Yeah, it's closer by far.
>> Looks a bit more graphical.
>> Yeah, so tell us about Textual and why not just more features on Rich?
>> Yeah, so Rich has some kind of dynamic features.
There are progress bars and they're updating live dashboards.
And I've been asked quite a lot if I could add keyboard support and
mouse support. And I've resisted for quite a while because I want to keep the focus of
Ridge onto just generating mostly static output. Then I saw a project called GH top, which
is kind of like H top, but it would take information from the GitHub API. And it would show you
like real time events and they used, oh, there we go.
And they used Rich for that.
And when I saw that, I realized, oh, I've got to do this.
There's a lot of potential there.
And I put it off a little bit,
but then I started on it and I kind of realized that, yeah,
there's quite a lot you can do with a terminal.
- And this is really,
this is one of the things that blew my mind.
So maybe, you know, give us a sense of,
I'm trying to pull a particular picture.
Maybe this is just one I could sort of leave on the screen.
But one of the things I remember from my early days
of GUI type development is,
how do you resize stuff on the screen, right?
So I want to put something where like the main window's here,
but then I want the status bar thing,
but I want it to stick to the bottom.
And then I want some other stuff on the left.
And it sounds like that would be pretty tricky
to just dynamically try to generate with rich,
but with textual, you can say like,
this thing docks to the left and this docks to the bottom
and here this fills the main content.
And then those bits in the middle,
are those basically rendered either more of these containers
and these widgets or is that rich directly
or give us people a sense of what they build with this?
- So Rich does the rendering.
Rich is responsible for getting stuff onto the screen,
but textual handles the dynamic stuff.
At the most atomic layer,
there's something called a widget.
And a widget is almost like a software component in itself.
It's built on async I/O.
So each widget has its own async I/O task
and it's constantly processing events.
And Textual can, will change the size of that
and change the layout in response to resizing the terminal.
And you can tell it how the widgets fit together
within the given dimensions of the time.
- You've got like the layout elements
that handle docking and whatnot.
- Yeah.
- Very cool.
So one of the examples you have on the textual readme
is building one of these widgets.
So you just create a class, it drives from widget.
Here you have a hover example
and it has a way to render itself.
And then it very much like traditional,
I'm thinking of building like VB6 apps or Windows Forms apps,
like these traditional ones where you have drag and drop widgets.
They have these events, right?
And one of the events here,
you wouldn't think of this as a terminal thing.
We've got like, you know, on mouse,
you know, on enter, on leave,
and, you know, mouse over and things like that, right?
Like those are regular UI types of interactions
that you would not expect to see in a text-based app, right?
- Yeah. - That's fantastic.
So it's very much, it's based partially on my knowledge
of writing desktop applications, which is quite old now.
- Where did you write them in?
- WX Widgets mostly.
- Yeah.
- So it's a C++ framework, I think it's got a Python layer.
- Yeah, there's WX Python.
I think that might be the next, the Python wrapper.
- That's right, yeah.
And then, but in the last 10 years,
I haven't done any desktop applications.
I've been working mostly in the web.
So it's mostly influenced by web development
with modern frameworks, particularly Vue,
which I've used a few times.
- Vue's nice, yeah, Vue's very nice.
- So I'm trying to replicate some of the best features,
I think, of Vue into the terminal.
And I'm surprised how well some of these features
Translate. Yeah.
Yeah, this is incredible.
It it really does build these interactive things.
Now another thing to talk about is.
How do you control the look and feel right?
Like the way I the way you might do it in
rich is you might have one of these console markups
or markdown or you could use a console and set a style.
But if you're inspired by the web, you know.
like dot main container hash thing I want to style, right?
Like it's some sort of CSS selector, right?
- Yeah, so you've read my mind.
I've been last few days working on CSS.
It's going to work very much.
- Is it actual CSS or CSS like stuff?
Like what do you have in mind here?
- So it's probably not actual CSS
because a lot of the stuff just wouldn't apply.
- Yeah, it doesn't make sense, sure.
- But essentially it's the selectors.
So I will have selectors where you can select an ID
and then a child with a class name, et cetera.
- I mean, that's basically what I was thinking
when I was saying real CSS, right?
Like, is it, what I say,
well, I say like hash container dot children type
and I would write that or is it like not exactly that?
- It's exactly like that.
Yeah, the only thing that differs is the,
I don't know what you call them,
the bit that goes inside the curly brackets,
the actual rules, they will be different.
- Sure, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, they render different things,
but very much like CSS.
If you come from the web, you see this,
you'd be very much at home.
- Nice, I could probably even use less
and transpile that down to CSS and then put the odds,
yeah, maybe, who knows?
- Maybe, I was thinking, should I just do CSS,
which is hard enough in itself, or should I try to implement less or SASS or one of
these things?
Well, I'm going to try CSS, first of all.
If you get it working with CSS, then you probably can get the LESS compiler to generate the
right CSS out of it somehow.
Yeah, maybe.
But actually, one of the worst things, I think, of JavaScript and web app development is all
those pre-processors.
I know.
I'm 100% with you.
and you've got to run all these tasks
and all these CLI things just to get it
so you can start using your app.
It's like, there's something kind of broken about this.
Can I just--
- Yeah.
- Do the file here and go?
Like it's gotten so complicated
that JavaScript is one of the more complicated ways
to write code rather than one of the simplest,
I think these days.
- Exactly, yeah.
There was a time where front end development
was seen as kind of like the baby brother
of like real development.
- I have you in your QJ query, come on.
- That's not true anymore.
I don't think it's been true for a while.
I think front-end development requires
just the same type of thinking as back-ends.
You've got to organize all these different processes
together and mental models.
And it's actually more complicated
because there's so much going on.
There's so many little things you've got to remember.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, you're taking so much of like
modern software development and squishing it down
to this narrow little bit that is like
run it in JavaScript on the browser, right?
Like it's kind of got to fit into this historically
what used to be like a narrow focused environment
and now it's definitely not.
- Yeah, so I'm trying to take what I think
are the good things about front end development
and apply them to terminal
and hopefully leave out the things
which I don't like so much.
- Yeah, that sounds great.
So maybe for this one,
I think what people should probably do
is they should check out the examples, right?
The examples from Textual,
they can clone the repo and just run these and it's super easy.
There's also a way to see them, I guess,
on the developer video log here.
Are these you doing these videos here?
- Yeah, just a short demo of each.
- Nice.
This is my ad apparently I'm getting now.
We'll not play that.
I can go YouTube.
All right, so yeah, but people can go and check these out
because I think seeing it in action
is really what you need to appreciate Textual.
- And it can demonstrate the features
which Textual can do,
which I don't see in other TUI frameworks.
I'm thinking particularly of animation.
- Yeah, I was just thinking like CSS easing functions
and those types of animations, yeah.
- Yeah, I was surprised that how well that worked.
I was animating things at 60 frames a second
and it can go up to 120 frames per second.
Yeah, the terminals these days,
that they're built on the same technology as video games.
They use hardware accelerated graphics under the hood.
So they can actually render terminal updates
very, very quickly.
And I don't think people have taken advantage of that.
- How long until someone re-implements Doom on Rich?
Or on Texture?
- I'm sure it's possible.
Yeah, you could render it and then,
I don't know, render onto text.
I don't know how you do it,
but various ways of rendering images.
So in theory, you could put Doom in the middle of it.
I would say start with really, really small fonts
and a big terminal window so you get higher resolution.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> But yeah, you've got the color, you've got the emojis.
I bet you could make it happen.
Awesome.
All right, well, we're getting pretty short on time here, Will.
Anything else you want to sort of throw in about textual or even
rich before we wrap it up?
- Nothing comes to mind, but just to say
that I like getting feedback, input.
So if you have any suggestions,
jump onto textual discussion board,
or if you find any bugs, let me know,
or connect with me on Twitter,
and I'm happy to talk about these things.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Also, wanna give a shout out
to one of your other projects real quick?
- Okay, great, yeah.
So this is a Pathify system.
I've been working on that for well over 10 years now.
I've handed it over to some very talented developers.
But essentially the idea is that there's
abstraction there for file systems.
So the same code can write to your disk drive
or an FTP server or a zip file
and just all works exactly the same way.
- Nice, do you have like cloud format support
like S3 and things like that?
- Yeah, exactly, yeah.
So there's an S3 version and there's a Google Cloud version
and there's dozens of other implementations.
- Any database stuff?
Can I like treat a table as a directory
or something like that?
- I wouldn't be surprised if there is.
I don't know of any off the top of my head,
but some people have done some quite creative things
where they've made something which is not a file system
look like a file system.
- Oh, look at this, Dropbox FS.
Dropbox has a file system.
Okay, that's pretty amazing.
Okay, here's the index of file systems.
Let's see, we've got application data FTP in memory.
Oh, that's pretty slick.
So you can read and write files,
like say for tests and not care.
- Yeah, exactly. - 10 files maybe.
10 files would be fantastic, right?
- Yeah, so you can use 10 files,
and like you said, for testing.
So you can write it into memory
without bothering to write it onto your hard drive.
- Okay, the multi-file system.
so you could multiplex reads and writes,
that's pretty killer.
- Yeah, that's more, I remember correctly,
you can layer several file systems.
So you could have one to write and then several to read,
and depending on where the file is,
it'll just make it appear like a single file system.
- Cool.
Yeah, a lot of neat stuff here.
So people, if they got a lot of file reading and writing
to do, they can check that out.
Also, I wanna give a quick shout out,
saw Paul Everett on the live stream out there.
So Paul and you dove inside in a more visual way into textual.
So I'll link to a live stream you all did over there together.
Great.
Cool.
Yeah, that was fun.
Yeah, awesome.
All right, well, I think that pretty much wraps it up.
So I'll give you the final two questions before we get out
of here, though.
So, Will, if you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use these days?
- I use VS Code, I've used that for quite a while.
I'm quite happy with it,
but I do try other editors from time to time.
- Nice, and then in addition to pip install rich
and pip install textual, any other packages out there
you wanna give a shout out to that you think
could use some eyeballs and some attention?
Anything that's impressed you lately?
- I'm drawing a blank.
There's so many.
- It is hard to choose, isn't it?
- There's a project I saw.
Can I mention one that uses Rich?
It was quite cool. - Of course, absolutely.
- It's called Object Explorer.
It's a terminal user interface, but it's not,
I think it's OBJ Explorer, which is quite nice.
you could create an up, you explore a Python object
and you can navigate into it in a visual way
and it will show you the attributes, et cetera.
- Oh, fantastic.
Yeah, that sounds really fun.
Is this for like in memory Python objects
or database objects or what is it?
- Oh, in memory Python objects.
So I think it's like a debugging tool.
It's kind of like, it's a bit like rich.inspect
but it's more visual.
- Okay, yeah, fantastic.
We'll have to link to that one.
All right, Will, so thank you for being here.
This has been really great.
Congratulations on both of these projects
and all the momentum you've gotten.
Final call to action,
people wanna check out Richer Textual,
maybe wanna support you,
whatever else you wanna give a final shout out
for a call to action before we call it a show.
- Just connect with me on Twitter.
My handle is @willmcgoogan.
say hi, I'm happy to talk on Twitter.
- All right, right on.
Be sure to put the link in the show notes.
Thanks for being here, Will.
- Thank you, it's been great.
- Yeah, bye. - Bye-bye.
- Thanks everyone for being here to livestream as well.